doc/source/testing.rst, before:

.. -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
.. _testing:

===================
Tests in MDAnalysis
===================

.. note::

    Parts of this page came from the `Contributing to pandas <http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/contributing.html>`_ guide.

Whenever you add new code, you should create an appropriate test case that checks that your code is working as it should. This is very important because:

    #. Firstly, it ensures that your code works as expected, i.e.

        - it succeeds in your test cases *and*
        - it fails predictably
    #. More importantly, in the future we can always test that it is still working correctly. Unit tests are a crucial component of proper software engineering (see e.g. `Software Carpentry on Testing <http://software-carpentry.org/4_0/test>`_) and a large (and growing) test suite is one of the strengths of MDAnalysis.

Adding tests is one of the most common requests after code is pushed to MDAnalysis.  Therefore,
it is worth getting in the habit of writing tests ahead of time so this is never an issue. We strive for ≥90% our code to be covered by tests.

We strongly encourage contributors to embrace
`test-driven development <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test-driven_development>`_.
This development process "relies on the repetition of a very short development cycle:
first the developer writes an (initially failing) automated test case that defines a desired
improvement or new function, then produces the minimum amount of code to pass that test."
So, before actually writing any code, you should write your tests.  Often the test can be
taken from the original GitHub issue.  However, it is always worth considering additional
use cases and writing corresponding tests.

Like many packages, MDAnalysis uses `pytest
<http://doc.pytest.org/en/latest/>`_ and some of the `numpy.testing
<http://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/routines.testing.html>`_ framework.

.. _run-test-suite:

Running the test suite
======================

It is recommended that you run the tests from the ``mdanalysis/testsuite/MDAnalysisTests/`` directory.

.. code-block:: bash

    cd testsuite/MDAnalysisTests
    pytest  --disable-pytest-warnings

All tests should pass: no **FAIL** or **ERROR** cases should be triggered; *SKIPPED* or *XFAIL* are ok. For anything that fails or gives an error, ask on the `mdnalysis-discussion`_ mailing list or raise an issue on the `Issue Tracker <https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/issues>`_.

We use the ``--disable-pytest-warnings`` when the whole testsuite is running, as pytest raises a lot of false positives when we warn users about missing topology attributes. When running single tests or only single modules, consider running the tests *with* warnings enabled (i.e. without ``--disable-pytest-warnings``). This allows you to see if you trigger any un-caught deprecation warnings or other warnings in libraries we use.

To run specific tests just specify the path to the test file:

.. code-block:: bash

    pytest testsuite/MDAnalysisTests/analysis/test_align.py


Specific test classes inside test files, and even specific test methods, can also be specified:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Test the entire TestContactMatrix class
    pytest testsuite/MDAnalysisTests/analysis/test_analysis.py::TestContactMatrix

    # Test only test_sparse in the TestContactMatrix class
    pytest testsuite/MDAnalysisTests/analysis/test_analysis.py::TestContactMatrix::test_sparse


This is very useful when you add a new test and want to check if it passes. However, before you push your code to GitHub, make sure that your test case runs and that *all other test cases are still passing*.

-------------------
Testing in parallel
-------------------

Running the tests serially can take some time, depending on the performance of your computer. You can speed this up by using the plugin `pytest-xdist <https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest-xdist>`_ to run tests in parallel by specifying the ``--numprocesses`` option:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install pytest-xdist
    pytest --disable-pytest-warnings --numprocesses 4


You can try increasing the number of processes to speed up the test run. The number of processes you can use depends on your machine.

-------------
Test coverage
-------------

The tool `pytest-cov <https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest-cov>`_  can be used to generate the coverage report locally:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install pytest-cov
    pytest --cov=MDAnalysis


Note: You can use the ``--numprocesses`` flag to run tests in parallel with the above command too. This will print the coverage statistic for every module in MDAnalysis at the end of a run. To get detailed line by
line statistics you can add the ``--cov-report=html`` flag. This will create a ``htmlcov`` folder (in the directory you run the command from) and there will be an ``index.html`` file in this folder. Open this file in your browser and you will be able to see overall statistics and detailed line coverage for each file.

.. _continuous-integration:

Continuous Integration tools
============================

When you submit your pull request, several continuous integration tools will run a suite of tests. These should all pass before your code can be merged into MDAnalysis. You can check tests locally by :ref:`running the test suite <run-test-suite>`.

If your pull request fails immediately with an :ref:`appveyor` error, it is likely that you have merge conflicts with the latest code in the ``develop`` branch. :ref:`Rebase your code <rebase-code>` and update your branch by pushing your changes.

If you get an error with :ref:`travis`, it is likely that you've failed a particular test. You should update your code and push again.

If you get :ref:`codecov` errors, this means that your changes have not been adequately tested. Add new tests that address the "missed" lines, and push again.

Ideally, you want all tests to pass. This will look like:

    .. image:: images/ci_checks_passed.png

.. _appveyor:

--------
Appveyor
--------

`AppVeyor`_ is a continuous integration/continuous deployment service. MDAnalysis uses it for `testing builds on Windows`_.

Builds are configured in the file ``.appveyor.yml``. If you add a new dependency to MDAnalysis, you will need to add it to the ``$CONDA_DEPENDENCIES`` or ``$PIP_DEPENDENCIES`` in ``.appveyor.yml`` to pass tests.

.. _`testing builds on Windows`: https://ci.appveyor.com/project/orbeckst/mdanalysis


.. _travis:

------
Travis
------

`Travis is a continuous integration service <https://travis-ci.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis>`_ for Linux and MacOS. MDAnalysis uses it for exhaustive testing on Linux systems, and some testing on MacOS. If you add a new dependency to MDAnalysis, you will need to add it to the ``$CONDA_DEPENDENCIES`` or ``$PIP_DEPENDENCIES`` in ``.travis.yml`` to pass tests.


.. _codecov:

-------
Codecov
-------

Code coverage measures how many lines, and which lines, of code are executed by a test suite. Codecov is a service that turns code coverage reports into a single visual report. Each line is described as one of three categories:

    - a **hit** indicates that the source code was executed by the test suite.
    - a **partial** indicates that the source code was not fully executed by the test suite; there are remaining branches that were not executed.
    - a **miss** indicates that the source code was not executed by the test suite.

Coverage is the ratio of ``hits / (sum of hit + partial + miss)``. See the `Codecov documentation <https://docs.codecov.io/docs/about-code-coverage>`_ for more information.

MDAnalysis aims for 90% code coverage; your pull request will fail the Codecov check if the coverage falls below 85%. You can increase coverage by writing futher tests.

On your pull request, Codecov will leave a comment with three sections:

    - a visual map of the areas with coverage changes

        .. image:: images/codecov_report_map.png

    - a summary of changes in coverage

        .. image:: images/codecov_report_summary.png

    - a list of files with changes

        .. image:: images/codecov_report_files.png

Clicking on one of those files will show the Codecov :guilabel:`Diff` view, highlighting the lines of code that have been missed by tests. In the image below, the column on the left hand side shows hits (green) and misses (red); the lighter colours highlighting the code show lines added (light green) or removed (light red).

    .. image:: images/codecov_diff.png

Changing to the :guilabel:`Coverage Changes` view highlights how your additions have changed the test coverage. See the `documentation for viewing source code <https://docs.codecov.io/docs/viewing-source-code>`_ for more information.

    .. image:: images/codecov_coverage_changes.png

.. _write-new-tests:

Writing new tests
=================

Tests are organised by top-level module. Each file containing tests must start with ``test_``. The tests themselves also have to follow the appropriate naming and organisational conventions.

Use classes to group tests if it makes sense (e.g., if the test class will be inherited by another test class and the code can be reused). We prefer subclassing over parametrizing classes (for examples, have a look at the ``MDAnalysisTests/topology`` module, where each class often tests a different file). For tests that are standalone, leave them as plain functions.

.. _testing-conventions:

-------------------
General conventions
-------------------

Assertions
----------

Use plain ``assert`` statements for comparing single values, e.g. ::

    def test_foo_is_length_3(foo):
        assert len(foo) == 3

To check equality up to a certain precision (e.g. floating point numbers and iterables of floats), use :func:`~numpy.testing.assert_almost_equal` from :mod:`numpy.testing`. Do not manually round off the value and use plain ``assert`` statements. Do not use ``pytest.approx``. ::

    from numpy.testing import assert_almost_equal

    def test_equal_coordinates():
        ref = mda.Universe(PSF, PDB_small)
        u = mda.Universe(PDB_small)
        assert_almost_equal(u.atoms.positions, ref.atoms.positions)

To test for exact equality (e.g. integers, booleans, strings), use :func:`~numpy.testing.assert_equal` from :mod:`numpy.testing`. As with :func:`~numpy.testing.assert_almost_equal`, this should be used for iterables of exact values as well. Do not iterate over and compare every single value. ::

    from numpy.testing import assert_equal

    def test_equal_arrays(array1, array2):
        assert_equal(array1, array2)

Do not use ``assert_array_equal`` or ``assert_array_almost_equal`` from :mod:`numpy.testing` to compare array/array-like data structures. Instead, use :func:`~numpy.testing.assert_equal` or :func:`~numpy.testing.assert_almost_equal`. The former set of functions equate arrays and scalars, while the latter do not:

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    from numpy.testing import assert_equal, assert_array_equal
    assert_array_equal([1], 1)
    assert_equal([1], 1)

Do not use anything from :mod:`numpy.testing` that depends on ``nose``, such as ``assert_raises``.

Testing exceptions and warnings
-------------------------------

Do not use ``assert_raises`` from :mod:`numpy.testing` or the ``pytest.mark.raises`` decorator to test for particular exceptions. Instead, use context managers::

    def test_for_error():
        a = [1, 2, 3]
        with pytest.raises(IndexError):
            b = a[4]

    def test_for_warning():
        with pytest.warns(DeprecationWarning):
            deprecated_function.run()

Failing tests
-------------

To mark an expected failure, use :func:`pytest.mark.xfail` decorator::

    @pytest.mark.xfail
    def tested_expected_failure():
        assert 1 == 2

To manually fail a test, make a call to :func:`pytest.fail`::

    def test_open(self, tmpdir):
        outfile = str(tmpdir.join('lammps-writer-test.dcd'))
        try:
            with mda.coordinates.LAMMPS.DCDWriter(outfile, n_atoms=10):
                pass
        except Exception:
            pytest.fail()

Skipping tests
--------------

To skip tests based on a condition, use :func:`pytest.mark.skipif(condition) <pytest.mark.skipif>` decorator::

    import numpy as np
    try:
        from numpy import shares_memory
    except ImportError:
        shares_memory = False

    @pytest.mark.skipif(shares_memory == False,
                        reason='old numpy lacked shares_memory')
    def test_positions_share_memory(original_and_copy):
        # check that the memory in Timestep objects is unique
        original, copy = original_and_copy
        assert not np.shares_memory(original.ts.positions, copy.ts.positions)


To skip a test if a module is not available for importing, use :func:`pytest.importorskip('module_name') <pytest.importorskip>` ::

    def test_write_trajectory_netCDF4(self, universe, outfile):
        pytest.importorskip("netCDF4")
        return self._test_write_trajectory(universe, outfile)

--------
Fixtures
--------

Use `fixtures <https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/fixture.html>`_ as much as possible to reuse "resources" between test methods/functions. Pytest fixtures are functions that run before each test function that uses that fixture. A fixture is typically set up with the :func:`pytest.fixture` decorator, over a function that returns the object you need::

    @pytest.fixture
    def universe(self):
        return mda.Universe(self.ref_filename)

A function can use a fixture by including its name in its arguments::

    def test_pdb_write(self, universe):
        universe.atoms.write('outfile.pdb')

The rule of thumb is to use the largest possible scope for the fixture to save time. A fixture declared with a class scope will run once per class; a fixture declared with a module scope will only run once per module. The default scope is ``"function"``. ::

    @pytest.fixture(scope='class')
    def universe(self):
        return mda.Universe(self.ref_filename)


-----------------------------------------------
Testing the same function with different inputs
-----------------------------------------------

Use the :func:`pytest.mark.parametrize` decorator to test the same function for different inputs rather than looping. These can be stacked::

    @pytest.mark.parametrize('pbc', (True, False))
    @pytest.mark.parametrize('name, compound', (('molnums', 'molecules'),
                                                ('fragindices', 'fragments')))
    # fragment is a fixture defined earlier
    def test_center_of_mass_compounds_special(self, fragment,
                                              pbc, name, compound):
        ref = [a.center_of_mass() for a in fragment.groupby(name).values()]
        com = fragment.center_of_mass(pbc=pbc, compound=compound)
        assert_almost_equal(com, ref, decimal=5)

.. role:: python(code)
   :language: python

The code above runs ``test_center_of_mass_compounds_special`` 4 times with the following parameters:

    - pbc = ``True``, name = ``'molnums'``, compound = ``'molecules'``
    - pbc = ``True``, name = ``'fragindices'``, compound = ``'fragments'``
    - pbc = ``False``, name = ``'molnums'``, compound = ``'molecules'``
    - pbc = ``False``, name = ``'fragindices'``, compound = ``'fragments'``


-------------------------------
Temporary files and directories
-------------------------------

Do not use :func:`os.chdir` to change directories in tests, because it can break the tests in really weird ways (see `Issue 556`_). To use a temporary directory as the working directory, use the :func:`tmpdir.as_cwd` context manager instead::

    def test_write_no_args(self, u, tmpdir): # tmpdir is an in-built fixture
        with tmpdir.as_cwd():
            u.atoms.write()

To create a temporary file::

    def outfile(tmpdir):
        temp_file = str(tmpdir.join('test.pdb'))


.. _`Issue 556`: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/issues/556

Module imports
--------------

:ref:`Do not use relative imports <module-imports-in-tests>` in test files, as it means that tests can no longer be run from inside the test directory. Instead, use absolute imports. ::

    from .datafiles import PDB  # this is relative and will break!
    from MDAnalysisTests.datafiles import PDB  # use this instead

Tests for analysis and visualization modules
============================================

Tests for analysis classes and functions should at a minimum perform regression tests, i.e., run on input and compare to values generated when the code was added so that we know when the output changes in the future. (Even better are tests that test for absolute correctness of results, but regression tests are the minimum requirement.)

Any code in :mod:`MDAnalysis.analysis` that does not have substantial testing (at least 70% coverage) will be moved to a special :mod:`MDAnalysis.analysis.legacy` module by release 1.0.0. This legacy module will come with its own warning that this is essentially unmaintained functionality, that is still provided because there is no alternative. Legacy packages that receive sufficient upgrades in testing can come back to the normal :mod:`MDAnalysis.analysis` name space.

No consensus has emerged yet how to best test visualization code. At least minimal tests that run the code are typically requested.


Using test data files
=====================

If possible, re-use the existing data files in MDAnalysis for tests; this helps to keep the (separate) MDAnalysisTests package small. If new files are required (e.g. for a new coordinate Reader/Writer) then:

    #. Use small files (e.g. trajectories with only a few frames and a small system).
    #. Make sure that the data are *not confidential* (they will be available to everyone downloading MDAnalysis) and also be aware that by adding them to MDAnalysis *you license these files* under the `GNU Public Licence v2 <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html>`_ (or a compatible licence of your choice — otherwise we cannot include the files into MDAnalysis).
    #. Add the files to the ``testsuite/MDAnalysisTests/data`` directory and appropriate file names and descriptions to ``testsuite/MDAnalysisTests/datafiles.py``.
    #. Make sure your new files are picked up by the pattern-matching in ``testsuite/setup.py`` (in the ``package_data`` dictionary).


.. _`mdnalysis-discussion`: http://groups.google.com/group/mdnalysis-discussion

Commit message:

fixes #201: update docs for CI/CD providers (#291)
* fixes #201: update testing providers

* review comments

doc/source/testing.rst, after:

.. -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
.. _testing:

===================
Tests in MDAnalysis
===================

.. note::

    Parts of this page came from the `Contributing to pandas <http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/contributing.html>`_ guide.

Whenever you add new code, you should create an appropriate test case that checks that your code is working as it should. This is very important because:

    #. Firstly, it ensures that your code works as expected, i.e.

        - it succeeds in your test cases *and*
        - it fails predictably
    #. More importantly, in the future we can always test that it is still working correctly. Unit tests are a crucial component of proper software engineering (see e.g. `Software Carpentry on Testing <http://software-carpentry.org/4_0/test>`_) and a large (and growing) test suite is one of the strengths of MDAnalysis.

Adding tests is one of the most common requests after code is pushed to MDAnalysis.  Therefore,
it is worth getting in the habit of writing tests ahead of time so this is never an issue. We strive for ≥90% our code to be covered by tests.

We strongly encourage contributors to embrace
`test-driven development <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test-driven_development>`_.
This development process "relies on the repetition of a very short development cycle:
first the developer writes an (initially failing) automated test case that defines a desired
improvement or new function, then produces the minimum amount of code to pass that test."
So, before actually writing any code, you should write your tests.  Often the test can be
taken from the original GitHub issue.  However, it is always worth considering additional
use cases and writing corresponding tests.

Like many packages, MDAnalysis uses `pytest
<http://doc.pytest.org/en/latest/>`_ and some of the `numpy.testing
<http://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/routines.testing.html>`_ framework.

.. _run-test-suite:

Running the test suite
======================

It is recommended that you run the tests from the ``mdanalysis/testsuite/MDAnalysisTests/`` directory.

.. code-block:: bash

    cd testsuite/MDAnalysisTests
    pytest  --disable-pytest-warnings

All tests should pass: no **FAIL** or **ERROR** cases should be triggered; *SKIPPED* or *XFAIL* are ok. For anything that fails or gives an error, ask on the `mdnalysis-discussion`_ mailing list or raise an issue on the `Issue Tracker <https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/issues>`_.

We use the ``--disable-pytest-warnings`` when the whole testsuite is running, as pytest raises a lot of false positives when we warn users about missing topology attributes. When running single tests or only single modules, consider running the tests *with* warnings enabled (i.e. without ``--disable-pytest-warnings``). This allows you to see if you trigger any un-caught deprecation warnings or other warnings in libraries we use.

To run specific tests just specify the path to the test file:

.. code-block:: bash

    pytest testsuite/MDAnalysisTests/analysis/test_align.py


Specific test classes inside test files, and even specific test methods, can also be specified:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Test the entire TestContactMatrix class
    pytest testsuite/MDAnalysisTests/analysis/test_analysis.py::TestContactMatrix

    # Test only test_sparse in the TestContactMatrix class
    pytest testsuite/MDAnalysisTests/analysis/test_analysis.py::TestContactMatrix::test_sparse


This is very useful when you add a new test and want to check if it passes. However, before you push your code to GitHub, make sure that your test case runs and that *all other test cases are still passing*.

-------------------
Testing in parallel
-------------------

Running the tests serially can take some time, depending on the performance of your computer. You can speed this up by using the plugin `pytest-xdist <https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest-xdist>`_ to run tests in parallel by specifying the ``--numprocesses`` option:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install pytest-xdist
    pytest --disable-pytest-warnings --numprocesses 4


You can try increasing the number of processes to speed up the test run. The number of processes you can use depends on your machine.

-------------
Test coverage
-------------

The tool `pytest-cov <https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest-cov>`_  can be used to generate the coverage report locally:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install pytest-cov
    pytest --cov=MDAnalysis


Note: You can use the ``--numprocesses`` flag to run tests in parallel with the above command too. This will print the coverage statistic for every module in MDAnalysis at the end of a run. To get detailed line by
line statistics you can add the ``--cov-report=html`` flag. This will create a ``htmlcov`` folder (in the directory you run the command from) and there will be an ``index.html`` file in this folder. Open this file in your browser and you will be able to see overall statistics and detailed line coverage for each file.

.. _continuous-integration:

Continuous Integration tools
============================

When you submit your pull request, several continuous integration tools will run a suite of tests. These should all pass before your code can be merged into MDAnalysis. You can check tests locally by :ref:`running the test suite <run-test-suite>`.

If your pull request fails immediately with an :ref:`appveyor` error, it is likely that you have merge conflicts with the latest code in the ``develop`` branch. :ref:`Rebase your code <rebase-code>` and update your branch by pushing your changes.

If you get an error with :ref:`travis`, it is likely that you've failed a particular test. You should update your code and push again.

If you get :ref:`codecov` errors, this means that your changes have not been adequately tested. Add new tests that address the "missed" lines, and push again.

Ideally, you want all tests to pass. This will look like:

    .. image:: images/ci_checks_passed.png

.. _github-actions:

--------------
GitHub Actions
--------------

Configured in `.github/` directory. Uses YAML syntax to define both workflows and actions. See `GitHub Actions documentation <https://help.github.com/en/actions>`_ for more information.


.. _azure:

-----
Azure
-----

Configured in `azure-pipelines.yml` file. Uses YAML syntax to define Azure Pipelines tasks. See `Azure Pipelines documentation <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/yaml-schema?view=azure-devops&tabs=schema>`_ for more information.


.. _cirrus:

---------
Cirrus CI
---------

The file `.cirrus.star` tells the provider what to do, it uses the Starlark syntax in YAML to define tasks. See `Cirrus CI documentation <https://cirrus-ci.org/guide/writing-tasks/>`_ for more information.

The actual files defining the workflows are in:

- maintainer/ci/cirrus-ci.yml
- maintainer/ci/cirrus-deploy.yml


.. _codecov:

-------
Codecov
-------

Code coverage measures how many lines, and which lines, of code are executed by a test suite. Codecov is a service that turns code coverage reports into a single visual report. Each line is described as one of three categories:

    - a **hit** indicates that the source code was executed by the test suite.
    - a **partial** indicates that the source code was not fully executed by the test suite; there are remaining branches that were not executed.
    - a **miss** indicates that the source code was not executed by the test suite.

Coverage is the ratio of ``hits / (sum of hit + partial + miss)``. See the `Codecov documentation <https://docs.codecov.io/docs/about-code-coverage>`_ for more information.

MDAnalysis aims for 90% code coverage; your pull request will fail the Codecov check if the coverage falls below 85%. You can increase coverage by writing futher tests.

On your pull request, Codecov will leave a comment with three sections:

    - a visual map of the areas with coverage changes

        .. image:: images/codecov_report_map.png

    - a summary of changes in coverage

        .. image:: images/codecov_report_summary.png

    - a list of files with changes

        .. image:: images/codecov_report_files.png

Clicking on one of those files will show the Codecov :guilabel:`Diff` view, highlighting the lines of code that have been missed by tests. In the image below, the column on the left hand side shows hits (green) and misses (red); the lighter colours highlighting the code show lines added (light green) or removed (light red).

    .. image:: images/codecov_diff.png

Changing to the :guilabel:`Coverage Changes` view highlights how your additions have changed the test coverage. See the `documentation for viewing source code <https://docs.codecov.io/docs/viewing-source-code>`_ for more information.

    .. image:: images/codecov_coverage_changes.png

.. _write-new-tests:

Writing new tests
=================

Tests are organised by top-level module. Each file containing tests must start with ``test_``. The tests themselves also have to follow the appropriate naming and organisational conventions.

Use classes to group tests if it makes sense (e.g., if the test class will be inherited by another test class and the code can be reused). We prefer subclassing over parametrizing classes (for examples, have a look at the ``MDAnalysisTests/topology`` module, where each class often tests a different file). For tests that are standalone, leave them as plain functions.

.. _testing-conventions:

-------------------
General conventions
-------------------

Assertions
----------

Use plain ``assert`` statements for comparing single values, e.g. ::

    def test_foo_is_length_3(foo):
        assert len(foo) == 3

To check equality up to a certain precision (e.g. floating point numbers and iterables of floats), use :func:`~numpy.testing.assert_almost_equal` from :mod:`numpy.testing`. Do not manually round off the value and use plain ``assert`` statements. Do not use ``pytest.approx``. ::

    from numpy.testing import assert_almost_equal

    def test_equal_coordinates():
        ref = mda.Universe(PSF, PDB_small)
        u = mda.Universe(PDB_small)
        assert_almost_equal(u.atoms.positions, ref.atoms.positions)

To test for exact equality (e.g. integers, booleans, strings), use :func:`~numpy.testing.assert_equal` from :mod:`numpy.testing`. As with :func:`~numpy.testing.assert_almost_equal`, this should be used for iterables of exact values as well. Do not iterate over and compare every single value. ::

    from numpy.testing import assert_equal

    def test_equal_arrays(array1, array2):
        assert_equal(array1, array2)

Do not use ``assert_array_equal`` or ``assert_array_almost_equal`` from :mod:`numpy.testing` to compare array/array-like data structures. Instead, use :func:`~numpy.testing.assert_equal` or :func:`~numpy.testing.assert_almost_equal`. The former set of functions equate arrays and scalars, while the latter do not:

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    from numpy.testing import assert_equal, assert_array_equal
    assert_array_equal([1], 1)
    assert_equal([1], 1)

Do not use anything from :mod:`numpy.testing` that depends on ``nose``, such as ``assert_raises``.

Testing exceptions and warnings
-------------------------------

Do not use ``assert_raises`` from :mod:`numpy.testing` or the ``pytest.mark.raises`` decorator to test for particular exceptions. Instead, use context managers::

    def test_for_error():
        a = [1, 2, 3]
        with pytest.raises(IndexError):
            b = a[4]

    def test_for_warning():
        with pytest.warns(DeprecationWarning):
            deprecated_function.run()

Failing tests
-------------

To mark an expected failure, use :func:`pytest.mark.xfail` decorator::

    @pytest.mark.xfail
    def tested_expected_failure():
        assert 1 == 2

To manually fail a test, make a call to :func:`pytest.fail`::

    def test_open(self, tmpdir):
        outfile = str(tmpdir.join('lammps-writer-test.dcd'))
        try:
            with mda.coordinates.LAMMPS.DCDWriter(outfile, n_atoms=10):
                pass
        except Exception:
            pytest.fail()

Skipping tests
--------------

To skip tests based on a condition, use :func:`pytest.mark.skipif(condition) <pytest.mark.skipif>` decorator::

    import numpy as np
    try:
        from numpy import shares_memory
    except ImportError:
        shares_memory = False

    @pytest.mark.skipif(shares_memory == False,
                        reason='old numpy lacked shares_memory')
    def test_positions_share_memory(original_and_copy):
        # check that the memory in Timestep objects is unique
        original, copy = original_and_copy
        assert not np.shares_memory(original.ts.positions, copy.ts.positions)


To skip a test if a module is not available for importing, use :func:`pytest.importorskip('module_name') <pytest.importorskip>` ::

    def test_write_trajectory_netCDF4(self, universe, outfile):
        pytest.importorskip("netCDF4")
        return self._test_write_trajectory(universe, outfile)

--------
Fixtures
--------

Use `fixtures <https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/fixture.html>`_ as much as possible to reuse "resources" between test methods/functions. Pytest fixtures are functions that run before each test function that uses that fixture. A fixture is typically set up with the :func:`pytest.fixture` decorator, over a function that returns the object you need::

    @pytest.fixture
    def universe(self):
        return mda.Universe(self.ref_filename)

A function can use a fixture by including its name in its arguments::

    def test_pdb_write(self, universe):
        universe.atoms.write('outfile.pdb')

The rule of thumb is to use the largest possible scope for the fixture to save time. A fixture declared with a class scope will run once per class; a fixture declared with a module scope will only run once per module. The default scope is ``"function"``. ::

    @pytest.fixture(scope='class')
    def universe(self):
        return mda.Universe(self.ref_filename)


-----------------------------------------------
Testing the same function with different inputs
-----------------------------------------------

Use the :func:`pytest.mark.parametrize` decorator to test the same function for different inputs rather than looping. These can be stacked::

    @pytest.mark.parametrize('pbc', (True, False))
    @pytest.mark.parametrize('name, compound', (('molnums', 'molecules'),
                                                ('fragindices', 'fragments')))
    # fragment is a fixture defined earlier
    def test_center_of_mass_compounds_special(self, fragment,
                                              pbc, name, compound):
        ref = [a.center_of_mass() for a in fragment.groupby(name).values()]
        com = fragment.center_of_mass(pbc=pbc, compound=compound)
        assert_almost_equal(com, ref, decimal=5)

.. role:: python(code)
   :language: python

The code above runs ``test_center_of_mass_compounds_special`` 4 times with the following parameters:

    - pbc = ``True``, name = ``'molnums'``, compound = ``'molecules'``
    - pbc = ``True``, name = ``'fragindices'``, compound = ``'fragments'``
    - pbc = ``False``, name = ``'molnums'``, compound = ``'molecules'``
    - pbc = ``False``, name = ``'fragindices'``, compound = ``'fragments'``


-------------------------------
Temporary files and directories
-------------------------------

Do not use :func:`os.chdir` to change directories in tests, because it can break the tests in really weird ways (see `Issue 556`_). To use a temporary directory as the working directory, use the :func:`tmpdir.as_cwd` context manager instead::

    def test_write_no_args(self, u, tmpdir): # tmpdir is an in-built fixture
        with tmpdir.as_cwd():
            u.atoms.write()

To create a temporary file::

    def outfile(tmpdir):
        temp_file = str(tmpdir.join('test.pdb'))


.. _`Issue 556`: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/issues/556

Module imports
--------------

:ref:`Do not use relative imports <module-imports-in-tests>` in test files, as it means that tests can no longer be run from inside the test directory. Instead, use absolute imports. ::

    from .datafiles import PDB  # this is relative and will break!
    from MDAnalysisTests.datafiles import PDB  # use this instead

Tests for analysis and visualization modules
============================================

Tests for analysis classes and functions should at a minimum perform regression tests, i.e., run on input and compare to values generated when the code was added so that we know when the output changes in the future. (Even better are tests that test for absolute correctness of results, but regression tests are the minimum requirement.)

Any code in :mod:`MDAnalysis.analysis` that does not have substantial testing (at least 70% coverage) will be moved to a special :mod:`MDAnalysis.analysis.legacy` module by release 1.0.0. This legacy module will come with its own warning that this is essentially unmaintained functionality, that is still provided because there is no alternative. Legacy packages that receive sufficient upgrades in testing can come back to the normal :mod:`MDAnalysis.analysis` name space.

No consensus has emerged yet how to best test visualization code. At least minimal tests that run the code are typically requested.


Using test data files
=====================

If possible, re-use the existing data files in MDAnalysis for tests; this helps to keep the (separate) MDAnalysisTests package small. If new files are required (e.g. for a new coordinate Reader/Writer) then:

    #. Use small files (e.g. trajectories with only a few frames and a small system).
    #. Make sure that the data are *not confidential* (they will be available to everyone downloading MDAnalysis) and also be aware that by adding them to MDAnalysis *you license these files* under the `GNU Public Licence v2 <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html>`_ (or a compatible licence of your choice — otherwise we cannot include the files into MDAnalysis).
    #. Add the files to the ``testsuite/MDAnalysisTests/data`` directory and appropriate file names and descriptions to ``testsuite/MDAnalysisTests/datafiles.py``.
    #. Make sure your new files are picked up by the pattern-matching in ``testsuite/setup.py`` (in the ``package_data`` dictionary).


.. _`mdnalysis-discussion`: http://groups.google.com/group/mdnalysis-discussion
