.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/questions.md, before:

---
name: Questions
about: If you want to ask a question please use the mailing list!
title: ''
labels: ''
assignees: ''

---

If you have a **QUESTION** such as

- how to use MDAnalysis in general
- how to accomplish something specific,
- what output means
- ... or similar questions related to USING MDAnalysis

then please *ask this question on the user mailing list*

   https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/mdnalysis-discussion

The issue tracker is meant for DEFECTS ("BUGS"), new FEATURES, and decisions on the direction of the user guide. In order to keep the volume of work on the issue tracker manageable for our volunteer developers, we will **immediately close issues that are better answered on the user mailing list.**

We really appreciate you as a user getting in touch with us --- no matter what you want to discuss. But we need your help keeping the amount of work manageable so please use the mailing list for questions and the issue tracker for code-related issues.

Thank you!

The MDAnalysis Development Team

Commit message:

Replace mailing list with GitHub Discussions (#349)

.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/questions.md, after:

---
name: Questions
about: If you want to ask a question please use GitHub Discussions!

---

If you have a **QUESTION** such as

- how to use MDAnalysis in general
- how to accomplish something specific,
- what output means
- ... or similar questions related to *USING* MDAnalysis

then please *ask this question on GitHub Discussions*

   https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/discussions

The issue tracker is meant for DEFECTS ("BUGS"), new FEATURES, and decisions on the API. In order to keep the volume of work on the issue tracker manageable for our volunteer developers, we will migrate issues with questions to [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/discussions).

We really appreciate you getting in touch with us --- no matter what you want to discuss. But we need your help keeping the amount of work manageable so please use [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/discussions) for questions and the issue tracker for code-related issues.

Thank you!

The MDAnalysis Development Team
